Splaying Preorders and Postorders∗

arXiv:1907.06309v1 [cs.DS] 15 Jul 2019

Caleb C. Levy†

Robert E. Tarjan‡

July 16, 2019

Abstract
Let T be a binary search tree of n nodes with root r, left subtree
L = left(r), and right subtree R = right(r). The preorder and postorder
of T are defined as follows: the preorder and postorder of the empty tree
is the empty sequence, and
preorder(T ) = (r) ⊕ preorder(L) ⊕ preorder(R)
postorder(T ) = postorder(L) ⊕ postorder(R) ⊕ (r),
where ⊕ denotes sequence concatenation.1 We prove the following results
about the behavior of splaying [21] preorders and postorders:
1. Inserting the nodes of preorder(T ) into an empty tree via splaying
costs O(n). (Theorem 2.)
2. Inserting the nodes of postorder(T ) into an empty tree via splaying
costs O(n). (Theorem 3.)
3. If T 0 has the same keys as T and T is weight-balanced [18] then
splaying either preorder(T ) or postorder(T ) starting from T 0 costs
O(n). (Theorem 4.)
For 1 and 2, we use the fact that preorders and postorders are patternavoiding: i.e. they contain no subsequences that are order-isomorphic
to (2, 3, 1) and (3, 1, 2), respectively. Pattern-avoidance implies certain
constraints on the manner in which items are inserted. We exploit this
structure with a simple potential function that counts inserted nodes lying
on access paths to uninserted nodes. Our methods can likely be extended
to permutations that avoid more general patterns. The proof of 3 uses the
fact that preorders and postorders of balanced search trees do not contain
many large “jumps” in symmetric order, and exploits this fact using the
dynamic finger theorem [6, 5].
Items 2 and 3 are both novel. Item 1 was originally proved by Chaudhuri and Höft [4]; our proof simplifies theirs. These results provide further
evidence in favor of the elusive dynamic optimality conjecture [21].
∗ Research at Princeton University partially supported by an innovation research grant from
Princeton and a gift from Microsoft.
† Baskin School of Engineering, UC Santa Cruz; cclevy@ucsc.edu.
‡ Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, and Intertrust Technologies;
ret@cs.princeton.edu.
1 We will refer to any such sequence as a preorder or a postorder.

1

Outline. Section 1 discusses the mathematical preliminaries, historical background, and context for this investigation, and Section 2 samples some related
work. Familiar readers may skip directly to the main results and their proofs,
in Sections 3 and 4. Section 3 proves that inserting both preorders and postorders via splaying takes linear time. Section 4 establishes that splaying preorders and postorders of balanced search trees [18] takes linear time, regardless
of starting tree. Section 5 provides our thoughts on how to analyze insertion
splaying permutations that avoid more general patterns, particularly the class
of “k-increasing” sequences [3].

1

Preliminaries

Binary Search Trees
A binary tree T contains of a finite set of nodes, with one node designated to
be the root. All nodes have a left and a right child pointer, each leading to a
different node. Either or both children may be missing, and we denote a missing
child by null. Every node in T , save for the root, has a single parent node of
which it is a child. (The root has no parent.) The size of T is the number of
nodes it contains, and is denoted |T |.
There is a unique path from root(T ) to every other node x in T , called the
access path for x in T . If x is on the access path for y then we say x is an ancestor
of y, and y is a descendent of x. We refer to the subtree comprising x and all
of its descendants as the subtree rooted at x. Nodes thus have left and right
subtrees rooted respectively at their left and right children. (Subtrees are empty
for null children.) The depth of the node x, denoted dT (x), is the number of
edges on its access path. Its right-depth is the number of right pointers followed,
and its left-depth is the number of left pointers followed.
In a binary search tree, every node has a unique key, and the tree satisfies
the symmetric order condition: every node’s key is greater than those in its
left subtree and smaller than those in its right subtree. The binary search tree
derives its name from how its structure enables finding keys. To find a key k
initialize the current node to be the root. While the current node is not null
and does not contain the given key, replace the current node by its left or right
child depending on whether k is smaller or larger than the key in the current
node, respectively. The search returns the last current node, which contains k
if k is in the tree and otherwise null.
The lowest common ancestor of x and y in T , denoted lcaT (x, y), is the
deepest node shared by the access paths of both x and y. Since the root is a
common ancestor of any pair of nodes in T and T is finite, lcaT (x, y) exists and
is well defined. Furthermore min{x, y} ≤ lcaT (x, y) ≤ max{x, y}.
To insert a new key k into a binary search tree T , we first do a search for
k in T . When the search reaches a missing node, we replace this node with a
node containing the key k. (Inserting into an empty tree makes k the root key.)

2

y
x
A

C
B

x

rotate at x

A
rotate at y

y
B

C

Figure 1: Rotation at node x with parent y, and reversing the effect by rotating
at y.
Rotation
Binary search trees are the canonical data structure for maintaining an ordered
set of elements, and are building blocks in countless algorithms. Perhaps the
most attractive feature of binary search trees is that the number of comparisons
required to find an item in an n-node binary search tree is O(log n), provided
that that the tree is properly arranged, which is good in theory and practice.
However, without exercising care when inserting nodes, a binary search tree
can easily become unbalanced (for example when inserting 1, 2, . . . , n in order),
leading to search costs as high as Ω(n). Thus, binary search trees require some
form of maintenance and restructuring for good performance.
We will employ a restructuring primitive called rotation. A rotation at left
child x with parent y makes y the right child of x while preserving symmetric
order. A rotation at a right child is symmetric, and rotation at the root is
undefined. (See Figure 1). A rotation changes three child pointers in the tree.
Rotations were first employed in “balanced” search trees, which include AVL
trees [1], Red-Black trees [10], weight-balanced trees [18], and more recently
weak AVL trees [11]. These trees augment nodes with bits that provide rough
information about how “balanced” each node’s subtree is. Whenever an item is
inserted or deleted, rotations are performed to restore invariants on the balance
bits that ensure all search paths have O(log n) nodes. While balanced searched
trees are not the focus of this work, they were progenitors for the main algorithm
of interest.
Splay
The Splay algorithm [21] eschews keeping track of balance information, replacing
it with an intriguing notion: instead of adjusting the search tree only after
insertion and deletion, Splay modifies the tree after every search.

3

x
A

z

z

y
C
B

y
C

Rotate at y, then at x

x

x

A

y

y
B

C

A

B

zig-zig

Rotate at x two times

x

C

A

zig-zag

Rotate at x

D

x

x

A
B

zig

y

D

B

C

y

A

z
D

z

B
C

D

Figure 2: A splaying step at node x. Symmetric variants not shown. Triangles
denote subtrees.
The algorithm begins with a binary search for a key in the tree. Let x be
the node returned by this search. If x is not null then the algorithm repeatedly applies a “splay step” until x becomes the root. A splay step applies a
certain series of rotations based on the relationship between x, its parent, and
its grandparent, as follows. If x has no grandparent (i.e. x’s parent is the root),
then rotate at x (this case is always terminal). Otherwise, if x is a left child and
its parent is a right child, or vice-versa, rotate at x twice. Otherwise, rotate at
x’s parent, and then rotate at x. Sleator and Tarjan [21] assigned the respective
names zig, zig-zag and zig-zig to these three cases. The series of splay steps that
bring x to the root are collectively called to as splaying at x, or simply splaying
x. The three cases are depicted in Figure 2.
The cost of splaying a single item x in T is defined to be dT (x) + 1.2 If
X = (x1 , . . . , xm ) is a sequence of requested
Pm keys in T then the cost of splaying
X starting from T is defined as m + i=1 dTi−1 (xi ), where T0 = T , and for
1 ≤ i ≤ m, we form Ti by splaying xi in Ti−1 . To perform insertion splaying,
insert a key into the tree and then splay the newly created node. The cost of
an insertion splay is the cost splaying the new node.
While splaying individual items can cost Ω(n), the total cost of splaying m
requested items in a tree of size n > 0 is O((m + n) log n). Hence, the worst
case cost of a splay operation, amortized over all the requests, is the same as
any balanced binary search tree. This is perhaps surprising for an algorithm
that keeps no record of balance information.
What makes Splay truly remarkable is how it takes advantage of “latent
2 We absorb the search cost into the rotations.

4

structure” in the request sequence, and provides more than simple “worst-case”
guarantees. As just one example, if tX (i) is the number of different items
accessed before access i since the last access to item xi (or since the beginning
of the sequence if i is the
Pmfirst access to xi ), then the cost to splay X starting
from T is O(n log n + j=1 log(tX (j) + 1)) [21].3 (This is called the “working
set” property.) Thus, Splay exploits “temporal locality” in the access pattern.
Splay simultaneously exploits “spatial” locality, as shown by the following
theorem (originally conjectured in [21]) that we will use later on:
Theorem 1 (Dynamic Finger [6, 5]). Let the rank of x in T , denoted rT (x),
be the number of nodes in T whose keys are less than or equal the key in x. The
cost of splaying XP= (x1 , . . . , xm ) starting from T is O(|T | + m + DFT (X)),
m
where DFT (X) ≡ i=2 log2 (|rT (xi ) − rT (xi−1 )| + 1).
In fact, the properties of Splay inspired the authors of [21] to speculate on a
much stronger possibility: that Splay’s cost is always within a constant factor
of the “optimal” way of executing the requests. Formally, an execution E for
(X, T ) comprises the following. Let T0 = T , and for 1 ≤ i ≤ m, we perform
some number ei ≥ 0 of rotations startingP
from Ti−1 to form Ti , followed by a
m
search for xi . The cost of this execution is i=1 (1+ei +dTi−1 (xi )). The optimal
cost OPT(X, T ) ≡ min{cost(E) | E executes (X, T )}. The following conjecture
has spawned a great deal of related research (see §2):
Conjecture 1 (Dynamic Optimality [21]). costsplay (X, T ) = O(OPT(X, T )).
The conjecture remains open. In fact, there is no sub-exponential time
algorithm whatsoever that is known to compute, even to within a constant
factor, the cost of an optimum binary search tree execution for an instance.
There are several known lower bounds [7, 25], none known to be tight (though
some conjectured to be).
Pattern-Avoidance
For simplicity, we restrict subsequent discussion to permutation request sequences (i.e. no key is requested twice). By [3], any algorithm that achieves
optimal cost on all permutations can be extended to an algorithm that is optimal
for all request sequences.
An auxiliary question to determining if Splay (or any other algorithm) is dynamically optimal is: “what class(es) of permutations have optimum executions
with ‘low’ cost?” This issue is not a mere curiosity, as almost every permutation of length n has optimal execution cost Θ(n log n) [14], a bound achieved by
any balanced search tree. Thus, in the absence of insertions or deletions, adjusting the tree after every access only gives an advantage on a small subset of
“structured” request sequences. In addition, these structured request sequences
provide candidate counter-examples to dynamic optimality. In this work, we
3 Note that O(log n) amortized cost per splay is a corollary of this.

5

focus on certain pattern-avoiding permutations: those that do not contain any
subsequences of a specified type. More formally:4
Two permutations α = (a1 , . . . , an ) and β = (b1 , . . . , bn ) of the same length
are order-isomorphic if their entries have the same relative order, i.e. ai <
aj ⇐⇒ bi < bj . For example, (5, 8, 1) is order-isomorphic to (2, 3, 1). A
sequence π avoids a sequence α (or is called α-avoiding) if it has no subsequence
that is order-isomorphic with α. If π is α-avoiding then all subsequences of π
are α-avoiding. We use π \ α as shorthand for “an (arbitrary) permutation π
that avoids α.” Both preorders and postorders may be characterized as patternavoiding permutations:
Lemma 1 (Lemma 1.4 from [13]). For any permutation π:
(a) π = preorder(T ) for some binary search tree T ⇐⇒ π avoids (2, 3, 1).
(b) π = postorder(T ) for some binary search tree T ⇐⇒ π avoids (3, 1, 2).
Sketch. For preorders, Kozma builds a bijection between binary search trees
and (2, 3, 1)-avoiding sequences, and uses a simple argument by contradiction
to show preorders avoid (2, 3, 1) [13]. The proof for postorders is a nearly symmetric variation of this argument.

2

Related Work

The first result about Splay’s behavior on pattern-avoiding request sequences
was the sequential access theorem [24]: the cost of splaying the nodes of T in
order is O(|T |). This is a special case of a corollary5 of dynamic optimality:
Conjecture 2 (Traversal [21]). There exists c > 0 for which the cost of splaying
preorder(T ) starting from T 0 is at most c|T | for all pairs of binary search trees
T, T 0 with the same keys.
Theorem 2 and [4] is another special case, when T = T 0 . In §3 we prove a
new special case: when T is α-weight balanced.
Interest in the behavior of binary search tree algorithms on “structured”
request sequences was revived by Seth Pettie’s analysis of the performance of
Splay-based deque data structures using Davenport-Schinzel sequences [20], and
his later reproof of the sequential access theorem via the theory of forbidden
submatrices [19].
This analysis was later adapted to and greatly extended for another binary
search tree algorithm, colloquially known as “Greedy,” that was first proposed
as an off -line algorithm independently by Lucas [16] and Munro [17]. Greedy
is widely conjectured to be dynamically optimal, and is known to have many of
4 The following definitions and theorems are taken from [13, Chapter 1.3], almost verbatim.
5 A priori, the traversal conjecture follows from dynamic optimality conditioned on Splay
being optimal with low “additive overhead.” The authors recently proved that this corollary
is actually unconditional [15].

6

the same properties of Splay, including the working set [8] and dynamic finger
[12] bounds.
Greedy was later recast as an on-line algorithm in a “geometric” view of
binary search trees [7]. This geometric view of Greedy is especially amenable
to forbidden submatrix analysis. In [3], Chalermsook et. al. show that Greedy
has nearly-optimal run-time on a broad class of pattern-avoiding permutations.
Moreover, they demonstrate that if Greedy is optimal on a certain class of “nondecomposable” permutations then it is dynamically optimal. Chalermsook et
al.’s analysis was later simplified in [9].

3

Insertion Splaying Preorders and Postorders

If π = (p1 , . . . , pn ) is a permutation then the insertion tree for π, denoted
BST(π), is the binary search tree obtained by starting from an empty tree and
inserting keys in order of their first appearance in π.
Lemma 2. If x is a proper ancestor of y in BST(π) then x precedes y in π.
Proof. Let π≺y denote the prefix of π containing the elements preceding y. By
construction, y is inserted as a child of some node z in BST(π≺y ). Every proper
ancestor of y is an ancestor of z, thus x ∈ BST(π≺y ). Hence, x precedes y.
Insertion splaying π has the same cost as splaying π starting from BST(π).6
For the purposes of analysis we will assume that, initially, every node in BST(π)
is marked as untouched. An insertion splay marks the node as touched, and
then splays the node. The touched nodes form a connected subtree containing
the root, called the touched subtree. The untouched nodes form subtrees each
of which contains no touched node. Call an untouched node with a touched
parent a sub-root. The subtrees rooted at sub-roots have identical structure in
both the splayed tree and BST(π). By Lemma 2, the next node to be touched
is always a sub-root.
For 1 ≤ i ≤ n, form Ti by touching and then splaying pi in Ti−1 , where
T0 = BST(π) starts with all nodes untouched. At any time we define the
potential to be the twice the number of touched nodes that are ancestors of
sub-roots, and we define Φi to be the potential of Ti . The amortized cost of
splaying pi in Ti−1 is defined as ci = ti + Φi − Φi−1 , where ti denotes the actual
cost.
telescoping sum argument, the cost of insertion splaying π
PnBy a standard
Pn
is i=1 ti = i=1 ci + Φ0 − Φn [23]. Since Φ0 = Φn = 0, an upper bound on
amortized cost provides an upper bound on the actual cost.
Pattern-avoidance provides certain information about both BST(π) and about
which sub-root can be touched next. We exploit this information in the next
two sections.
6 This is because the manner in which Splay restructures the access path is independent of
nodes outside the path.

7

Root

Root

w
x
y

z

x
y

z

Figure 3: Possible locations for the next sub-root x to be insertion splayed in
π \ (2, 3, 1). The case on the left occurs when the next splayed node has leftdepth 0, and the case on the right occurs when it has left-depth 1. Dashed
nodes may or may not be present, and any number of nodes may lie on the
paths denoted by dashed lines.
Preorders
There are no restrictions on the possible structure of preorder insertion trees as
BST(preorder(T )) = T .7 However, the manner in which sub-roots are chosen is
particularly simple.
Lemma 3. If π \ (2, 3, 1) = (p1 , . . . , pn ) is a preorder then, for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, pi is
the smallest sub-root of Ti−1 , where all nodes begin untouched in T0 = BST(π)
and Ti is formed by touching and splaying pi in Ti−1 .
Proof. The statement is vacuously true for i = 1. We prove for i > 1 by
contradiction, as follows. Suppose Ti−1 has some sub-root q that is smaller than
pi . Since q and pi are both sub-roots in Ti−1 , they are both children of respective
(though not necessarily distinct) nodes a and b in Ti−1 . Let r = lcaTi−1 (a, b).
Since q 6= a and pi 6= b, all of pi , q and r are distinct nodes in Ti−1 , and
furthermore q < r < pi . By Lemma 2, r precedes both q and pi in π, and by
construction pi precedes q. We thus have (r, pi , q) is a subsequence of π. But
(r, pi , q) is order-isomorphic with (2, 3, 1), contradicting π \ (2, 3, 1).
Theorem 2. Insertion splaying preorder(T ) keeps each sub-root at left-depth
at most 1 and takes O(1) amortized time per splay operation.
Proof. The theorem is trivial for the first insertion splay. The inductive hypothesis is that every sub-root has left depth 0 or 1. Let x be the next sub-root to
7 In fact, this property is shared by any permutation π for which every node in T appears
in π before those in its left and right subtrees.

8

be splayed, and let y and z (either or both of which can be missing) be its left
and right children. Touching x makes y and z into sub-roots.
Suppose x has left depth 0 before it is touched. Converting x from untouched
to touched (without splaying it) increases the potential by at most 2 and gives
the new sub-roots y and z left depths of 1 and 0, respectively. (In this case
they are the only two sub-roots.) Each splay step, except possibly the last, is a
zig-zig in which x starts as a left child with parent p and grandparent g. After
completing the zig-zig, g is no longer an ancestor of any untouched node, which
decreases the potential by 2. The zig-zig also preserves the left depths of y and
z. (y becomes the right child of p.) No other sub-roots can increase left-depth,
as x is the smallest sub-root. If the last splay step is a zig, the potential does
not change (although the length of the path to y increases by 1).
More complicated is the case in which x has left depth 1. Converting x from
untouched to touched (without splaying it) makes y a sub-root of left depth 2
and z a sub-root of left depth 1. Let w be the parent of the ancestor of x that is
a left child. All other sub-roots are in the right subtree of w, which is unaffected
by splaying x. The splay of x consists of 0 or more left zig-zigs, followed by a
zig-zag (which can either left-right or right-left), followed by zero of more left
zig-zigs, followed possibly by a zig. Each zig-zig reduces the potential by 2 and
preserves the left depths of all sub-roots. The zig-zag does not increase the
potential, reduces the left depth of y from 2 to 1, and that of x from 1 to 0, and
preserves the left depth of z. Now x has left depth 0, and the argument above
applies to the remaining splay steps.
By Lemma 3, the next node to be splayed will be y if present, otherwise z if
present, otherwise w if present. All three of these items have left-depth 0 or 1,
hence an identical form to Figure 3. Thus the hypothesis holds.
To obtain the constant factor, we observe that converting x from untouched
to touched increases the potential by 2. Each zig-zig step pays for itself: it
requires 2 rotations, paid for by the potential decreasing by at least 2. The zigzag requires 2 rotations, and the zig requires 1 rotation. If the cost of a splay is
the number of nodes on the splay path, equal to the number of rotations plus
1, we have an amortized cost of 6 per splay.
Postorders
Postorder insertion trees are more restricted. A binary search tree C is a (lefttoothed) comb if the access path for x ∈ C always comprises some number j ≥ 0
of right children followed by some number k ≥ 0 of left children. The nodes of
C are partitioned into teeth, where every node in the ith tooth has right-depth
i − 1. The shallowest node in a tooth is called the head. The insertion trees of
postorders are combs:
Lemma 4. If π is a postorder then no left child in BST(π) has a right child.
Proof. By contradiction. Let y be a left child in BST(π) with right child z, and
let x = parent(y). As z is y’s right child, y < z. Similarly, as both y and z
are in x’s left subtree, y < z < x. By Lemma 2, y can be an ancestor of z
9

Root

Root

w

x
y

x

z

y

Figure 4: Possible locations for the next sub-root x to be insertion splayed in
π \ (3, 1, 2). The case on the left occurs when the next splayed node is less than
the root, and the case on the right occurs when the next sub-root is the new
tree maximum. Dashed nodes may or may not be present, and any number of
nodes may lie on the paths denoted by dashed lines.
only if y precedes z in π, and similarly x must precede y. Thus, (x, y, z) is a
subsequence of π that is order-isomorphic to (3, 1, 2). By Lemma 1(b), π is not
a postorder.
While postorder insertion trees are less varied than for preorders, there may
be many postorders with a given insertion tree. This affords some amount of
freedom for choosing different sub-roots.
Lemma 5. Let π \ (3, 1, 2) = (p1 , . . . , pn ) be a postorder with insertion tree
sequence T0 , T1 , . . . , Tn . For 1 ≤ i ≤ n, pi is either:
(a) The single sub-root greater than max{Ti−1 } (if present), or
(b) The largest sub-root smaller than max{Ti−1 } (if present).
Proof. The result is vacuous for i = 1, 2. If pi is case (a), we merely note that
if pi is a new maximum then it must be the right child of the largest node in
max{Ti−1 }. There can be at most one sub-root in this position. Hence, pi is
unique.
For the sake of contradiction, suppose pi is not of the form in case (a) or (b),
and let q be the largest sub-root smaller than max{Ti−1 }. By Lemma 2, the
items of each tooth are added in decreasing order. As q is not the head of its
tooth, its successor r must be in Ti−1 , and furthermore r precedes both pi and
q in π. By construction, (r, pi , q) is a subsequence of π. Yet this subsequence is
isomorphic to (3, 1, 2) since pi < q < r, contradicting Lemma 1(b).
Theorem 3. Insertion splaying postorders maintains the following invariants:

10

1. After each insertion splay, the path to every sub-root comprises j ≥ 0 left
pointers followed by k ≥ 0 right pointers. (Furthermore, after the first
insertion, k ≥ 1.)
2. The left-depth of every sub-root decreases from smallest to largest.8
3. The splay operation takes constant amortized time.
Proof. The base case is trivial. Lemma 5 dictates that the next splayed sub-root
is either greater than all marked items, or is the largest sub-root smaller than
the tree root. Let x be the next node to be insertion splayed, y its left child,
and z its right child (either or both children may be missing).
Suppose x is greater than the current tree root. Marking x increases the
potential by 2 and makes y and z new sub-roots. The splay operation brings x
to the root by a sequence of left zig-zigs followed possibly by a left zig (depending
on whether the length of the access path is odd or even). After each one of these
zigs or zig-zigs, y’s left-depth remains 1, and z’s left depth remains 0. Let v be
the root prior to the splay operation. If the last splay step is a zig then the last
splay operation increases the left depth of v and everything in its left subtree by
either 1 or 2. Since the left-depth of x was 0 and x was the largest sub-root, the
inductive hypothesis ensures that all sub-roots had left-depth at least 1 before
the splay operation, and therefore at least 2 afterward. Thus, when x becomes
the root, the left-depths of each sub-root decrease from left to right.
Otherwise, x is the largest sub-root less than the root. Marking x again
increases the potential by at most 2. By Lemma 4, x has no right child (see
Figure 4), so we only need to worry about its left child y. Let w be the last
ancestor of x that is a left child. Each left zig-zig prior to the splay step involving
w maintains the left-depth of y to be one greater than the left-depth of x.
The splay step involving w will either be a left zig-zig or a left-right zig-zag,
depending on the length of the original path connecting w to x. Regardless,
immediately after the splay step involving w, the ancestor of y that is the left
child of x is either the left child of w or the left child of w’s parent. Since all
the sub-roots less than y are in the left subtree of w, and thus have left-depth
greater than the left-depth of y, the invariant is restored, and remains true after
each right zig-zig or zig that brings x to the root.
All that remains is showing constant amortized time. As noted before, marking x costs 2. If x is greater than the root then each left zig-zig, except possibly
the last, pays for itself, giving amortized cost of 4. In the other case, all splay
steps except for the one involving w and the one making x the root pay for
themselves, giving amortized cost at most 6.

4

Balanced Trees

Let |x| denote the size of the subtree rooted at x. Following [18], we say T is
α weight balanced for α ∈ (0, 1/2] if min{| left(x)|, | right(x)|} + 1 ≥ α · (|x| + 1)
8 The first two invariants dictate that the ancestors of sub-roots form a right-toothed comb.

11

for all x ∈ T , and write T ∈ BB[α].
Theorem 4. For any (fixed) 0 < α ≤ 1/2, if S ∈ BB[α] and T has the same
keys as S, then the cost of splaying preorder(S) or postorder(S) starting from
T is O(|T |).
Proof. By Theorem 1, it suffices to show that DFT (preorder(S)) = O(|T |). Let
Aα (n) ≡ max{DFT (preorder(S)) | S ∈ BB[α] and |T | = n}.
Recall that preorder(S) = (root(S)) ⊕ preorder(L) ⊕ preorder(R), where L
and R are the left and right subtrees of the root of S, respectively. Notice
that the rank differences between root(S) and the first item in preorder(L), and
between the last item in preorder(L) and the first item in preorder(R), are at
most |T | by definition. Hence,
DFT (preorder(S)) ≤ DFT (preorder(L)) + DFT (preorder(R)) + 2 log2 (|T | + 1).
Observe that (|L|+1)/(|S|+1) ∈ [α, 1−α] since S ∈ BB[α], and by definition
|R| < |S| − |L|. Hence,
Aα (n) =

max {Aα (β · n) + Aα ((1 − β) · n)} + O(log n).9

α≤β≤1/2

Akra-Bazzi’s result [2] suffices to show Aα (n) = O(n) for fixed α. The proof for
postorders is identical.
Remark 1. In actuality, Aα (n) = O(f (α) · n) for some function f of α. Unfortunately, the computation appears to be messy. We have declined to do the
necessary footwork, as we strongly suspect that, regardless, Aα (n) does not
tightly bound the cost of splaying these sequences.
Remark 2. This result extends to any binary search tree algorithm that satisfies
the dynamic finger bound. Iacono and Langerman proved Greedy also has
the dynamic finger property [12]; their analysis does not consider initial trees,
however.

5

Remarks

Patterns that avoid (2, 1, 3) are “symmetric” to those that avoid (2, 3, 1): if
π \ (2, 1, 3) then π is the preorder of the mirror image of BST(π). Similarly,
patterns that avoid (1, 3, 2) are symmetric to patterns that avoid (3, 1, 2). Thus,
insertion splaying π \ (2, 1, 3) and π \ (1, 3, 2) takes linear time.
The only other patterns of length three are (3, 2, 1) and its symmetric counterpart (1, 2, 3). The pattern (3, 2, 1) was explored in [3], where it was shown
9 Technically, since |L|/|S| < (|L| + 1)/(|S| + 1), we need to pick S sufficiently large for
a given alpha, and offset the recurrence term by a corresponding constant. This does not
asymptotically affect the result.

12

that Greedy executes (3, 2, 1)-avoiding permutations in linear time starting from
an arbitrary tree. In fact, they showed that executing π \ (k, . . . , 2, 1) takes time
2
proportional to n · 2O(k ) ; this is linear in n for fixed k. These permutations are
called k-increasing because they can be partitioned into k − 1 disjoint monotonically increasing subsequences [3]. They form the natural generalization of
sequential access, which is the (unique) permutation of the tree nodes that avoids
(2, 1).
More general invariants can be derived about insertion tree structure and
sub-root insertion order based on pattern-avoidance. As one particularly interesting example:
Theorem 5. If π\(k, . . . , 2, 1) then no node in BST(π) has left-depth more than
k − 2, and the next sub-root inserted (without splaying) is always the smallest
sub-root with its given left-depth.
The proof is similar to Lemmas 4 and 5. In particular, the insertion trees of
(3, 2, 1)-avoiding permutations look like the combs of postorder insertion trees,
except the teeth are rightward, instead of leftward paths.
For k-increasing sequences, the potential used for Theorems 2 and 3 needs
modifications. The main issue is that in both of these cases, the zig-zigs paid
for themselves because the nodes knocked off the access path did not have subroot descendants. This structure no longer holds for (3, 2, 1)-avoiding sequences,
since we must splay the nodes of the teeth in increasing order. The proof seems
to require a generalization of the sequential access theorem. It is possible that
the notion of kernel trees used by Sundar in [22] for a potential-based proof of
the sequential access theorem could be useful.

References
[1]

G. Adel’son-Vel’skii and E. Landis. An algorithm for the organization of
information. Sov. Math. Dokl., 3:1259–1262, 1962.

[2]

M. Akra and L. Bazzi. On the solution of linear recurrence equations.
Computational Optimization and Applications, 10(2):195–210, 1998.

[3]

P. Chalermsook, M. Goswami, L. Kozma, K. Mehlhorn, and T. Saranurak.
Pattern-avoiding access in binary search trees. In FOCS, pages 410–423,
2015.

[4]

R. Chaudhuri and H. HÃűft. Splaying a search tree in preorder takes linear
time. ACM SIGACT News, 24(2):88–93, 1993.

[5]

R. Cole. On the dynamic finger conjecture for splay trees. part ii: the
proof. SICOMP, 30(1):44–85, 2000.

[6]

R. Cole, B. Mishra, J. Schmidt, and A. Siegel. On the Dynamic Finger
Conjecture for Splay Trees. Part I: Splay Sorting log n-Block Sequences.
SICOMP, 30(1):1–43, 2000.

13

[7]

E. Demaine, D. Harmon, J. Iacono, D. Kane, and M. PÇŐtraÅ§cu. The
geometry of binary search trees. In SODA, pages 496–505, 2009.

[8]

K. Fox. Upper bounds for maximally greedy binary search trees. In WADS,
pages 411–422, 2011.

[9]

N. Goyal and M. Gupta. Better analysis of binary search tree on decomposable sequences. Theoretical Computer Science, 2019.

[10]

L. Guibas and R. Sedgewick. A dichromatic framework for balanced trees.
In FOCS, pages 8–21, 1978.

[11]

B. Haeupler, S. Sen, and R. Tarjan. Rank-balanced trees. TALG, 11(4),
2015.

[12]

J. Iacono and S. Langerman. Weighted dynamic finger in binary search
trees. In SODA, pages 672–691, 2016.

[13]

L. Kozma. Binary Search Trees, Rectangles and Patterns. PhD thesis,
Saarland University, 2016.

[14]

J. Kujala and T. Elomaa. The cost of offline binary search tree algorithms
and the complexity of the request sequence. TCS, 393:231–239, 2008.

[15]

C. Levy and R. Tarjan. A new path from splay to dynamic optimality. In
SODA, pages 1311–1330, 2019.

[16]

J. Lucas. Canonical Forms for Competitive Binary Search Tree Algorithms. Technical report, Rutgers University, 1988.

[17]

I. Munro. On the competitiveness of linear search. In ESA, pages 338–345,
2000.

[18]

J. Nievergelt and E. Reingold. Binary search trees of bounded balance.
SICOMP, 2(1):33–43, 1973.

[19]

S. Pettie. Applications of forbidden 0-1 matrices to search tree and path
compression-based data structures. In SODA, pages 1457–1467, 2010.

[20]

S. Pettie. Splay trees, davenport-schinzel sequences, and the deque conjecture. In SODA, pages 1115–1124, 2008.

[21]

D. Sleator and R. Tarjan. Self-adjusting binary search trees. J. ACM,
32(3):652–686, 1985.

[22]

R. Sundar. On the deque conjecture for the splay algorithm. Combinatorica, 12(1):95–124, 1992.

[23]

R. Tarjan. Amortized computational complexity. SIAM Journal on Algebraic and Discrete Methods, 6(2):306–318, 1985.

[24]

R. Tarjan. Sequential access in splay trees takes linear time. Combinatorica, 5(4):367–378, 1985.

[25]

R. Wilber. Lower bounds for accessing binary search trees with rotations.
SICOMP, 18(1):56–67, 1989.

14

